Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricard Loops. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Dale Greenwald. He's research associate in
the laboratory of Dr Conrad La Bandera, creator of
fossil anthropoids in the Paleobiology department at the Smithsonian's
National Museum of Natural History. And today we're focusing
on his book, Remnants of Ancient Life, The New
Science of Old Fossils. So, Doctor Greenwald, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you, Ricardo. Thank you for inviting me.
So, before we get into the biomolecules, we go
through in the book that uh can be preserved
in or as fossils, I guess we're, we're, we're
going to get into that just to introduce the
topic. I mean, when you find a fossil, first
of all, what are the most common kinds of
fossils that we expect to find? And when we
do find them, what kinds of information can we
usually expect to gather from them?
The classical definition of a fossil, of course, is
either an impression or a compression of a uh
organism that that died millions of years ago. And
uh from that fossil, we can gain a lot
of information about the organism's structure. And um if
we can study similar fossils, we can compare them
and we can construct a phylogeny based simply on
structure, which can give us a lot of information
about the evolution of those organisms. But it, it's
all based on, on what we can see visually
the, the, the structure of the fossil itself. And
that for hundreds of years has defined what the
science of paleobiology is. It's changing now. However, with
the advent of ancient biomolecules. Mhm
And I mean, how are biomolecules reserved in fossils?
Because I would imagine that there are limits to
this, correct?
Absolutely. Yes, there are uh uh limits. For example,
DNA uh originally was, it was thought that it
would be impossible for it to be preserved. Um
SIMPLY because it's a very um sensitive uh molecule
and it, it's easily degraded. But now we have
ancient DNA that's uh about 2 million years old.
Proteins similarly are uh easily degraded. But in fact,
um just this year, a new paper came out
and now we have a protein that is, I
think 11 or 12 subunits long, that is 6.3
million years old. This is relatively young, of course,
uh compared to fossils that are hundreds of millions
of years old. Uh And the methods by which
ancient biome biomolecules are preserved is as varied as
the uh fossils themselves. There isn't one particular mechanism
for preservation. There are many um and we are
simply lucky that uh a number of them work
and provide us with uh these amazing fossil records.
But, uh, I mean, when it comes to the
oldest biomolecules we found uh preserved, we're talking about
at best units of millions of years. Right. That's
what we're talking about here
for, for DNA. And protein is relatively young. But
there are other um biomolecules, for example, a chemical,
uh broad category of chemicals called porphyrins. One of
which is heme, the molecule in uh hemoglobin that,
that binds and releases oxygen, that is a very
important biomolecule. And it is uh potentially um you
know, hundreds of millions of years old. And in
fact, uh the uh the people who are exploring
Mars right now have instruments on the surface of
MARS. And one of the things they will do
is to try to identify the molecule uh the
porphyrin molecule. And so some biomolecules uh can in
theory, perhaps be as much as a billion years
old. Mhm.
And to what extent would it be possible for
us to get a better understanding of the origins
of life on earth by studying some of these
preserved biomolecules.
That's uh uh uh AAA difficult um project because
life originated billions of years ago. Uh There, there
is one very interesting aspect of, of ancient biomolecules
which involves something called ancient sequence reconstruction where we
use computers, artificial intelligence. If you will to try
to predict what the sequence of DNA and proteins
were hundreds of millions, perhaps even billions of years
ago. In one study actually um came up with
evidence that supported the origin of life at mid
oceanic ridges where we have these structures called black
smokers where very hot water is being released from
uh the uh inner portions of the earth. And
because of the warm temperatures uh there and because
of all the nutrients that accumulate around those sites,
there's al always been a theory that that in
fact is where life originated. It did not originate
on land, but rather at the mid oceanic ridges
and, and laboratories have used this technique of ancient
ancestral reconstruction to show that um proteins that may
have existed at those sites functioned at very high
temperatures unlike the proteins we have today.
And so, one of the illustrative examples you explore
in your book about how uh biomolecules get preserved
and some of the fossils associated with them. And
then of course, the information you can gather by
studying these biomolecules is the fossil of a blood
enlarged mosquito. So, could you tell us a little
bit about the story behind that fossil?
We're all familiar with blood and gorge mosquitoes, right?
We uh have watched them as they feel full
of blood uh on our arm or our hand,
they're very, very delicate, delicate and uh one would
never expect that such an organism would be preserved.
But um the uh conditions under which the, the
fossil insects were preserved at this site in Northwestern
Montana were very, very unique in that the uh
fossil insects uh were blown over or flew over
the surface of a lake, but they didn't simply
fall into the water and sink to the bottom
of the lake. What we think happened in, in
many cases, perhaps not all, but in many cases,
the surface of the water at that period of
time was covered with a layer of cyanobacteria. Uh
AN algal mat, some people call it green slime
and this material is very sticky. And so when
a tiny insect would fall onto it, the insect
would be trapped and the algae or the cyanobacteria
is uh photosynthetic. And so it grows towards the
sun and as it continues to grow, it would
surround and envelop the tiny insect and it would
protect it uh from many of the things that
might otherwise destroy the insect. And once uh the
temperature is cooled a little bit, that layer of
algae would sink to the bottom of the lake
with the entombed insect and would continue to protect
it. It it was very unique preservation conditions. And
so, um it in fact was able to preserve
uh these blood and gorge mosquitoes. And it, in
fact is the only place in the world where
uh we have fossils of, of blood and gorge
mosquitoes. When I first saw this fossil, the first
thing that came to mind was this in uh
enlarged and very dark abdomen? And I thought to
myself, wow, might that be blood? And uh of
course, thinking that it might be blood is very
different than proving that it is blood. And uh
we were very lucky in being able to uh
be able to use modern technology to in fact
prove that that fossil mosquito which was 46 million
years old contained uh uh remnants of uh hemoglobin.
A. And so for the audience to get, let's
say, a better understanding of how you go about
studying these biomolecules. Could you tell us a little
bit more about the sort of techniques that you
and your colleagues used in the particular case of
the mosquito fossil? But we can also talk a
little bit about that when it comes to other
kinds of biomolecules and particularly when you studied the
he molecule in this case,
yes, the technology is very important. Uh One of
the things that paleobiologist dislike are techniques that require
the destruction of the fossil in order to analyze
it, right. And so we had two techniques available
to us. Uh The first was called energy dispersive
spectroscopy or E DS. And we use that to
demonstrate that there were very high levels of the
metal iron in the abdomen of the mosquito. It
was absent from other parts of the mosquito or
the surrounding rock. And, and the heme molecule contains
iron at its center and in fact, it's the
iron molecule that attaches to and releases oxygen. And
so it's an integral part of the heme molecule.
So knowing that there were large amounts of iron
there, we suspected that the heat molecule might also
be there. And so we use a technique called
uh um secondary secondary ion mass spectrometry, which is
non destructive. Uh It doesn't harm the fossil, but
it um breaks uh tiny molecules into fragments and
creates fingerprint patterns of, of fragments that we can
use to definitively identify the presence of small molecules.
So those two techniques, both of them non destructive
uh showed us that uh in fact, uh the
porphyrin molecule, he was still there.
And so uh another kind of uh molecules uh
that you talk about in the book uh are
related to ancient pigments. So, could you tell us
how ancient pigments are studied and by studying them,
what can we learn about a particular species?
I think pigments probably are the most common of
all ancient biomolecules that extend really into deep time,
hundreds of millions of years old. Yeah. Um They
uh you have to be a a serious uh
organic chemist in order to study them because you
use um you know, very high tech instrumentation like
infrared spectroscopy um and, and, and other techniques. But
um if you have a specimen that uh is
large enough and it is a destructive technology because
you have to scrape off a bit of the
uh molecule. In order to isolate the pigment. Uh
USING this these techniques, you can um um determine
the the the exact structure, the organic structure of
of these pigments. Some pigments, however, frustratingly are difficult
to analyze. For example, probably the most common pigment
that we think about, especially when we think about
what color the feathers of of T rex were
um is melanin and of course, melanin is, is
responsible for all kinds of different uh pigmentation in
many different animals, but melanin, despite the fact that
it's very common, it is very difficult to identify.
It comes in a variety of structures and those
structures are really exceedingly large. And um in fact,
a number of papers have been published where uh
scientists attempt to uh identify melanin. But in fact,
uh using, for example, mass spectrometry, they can only
say that their data is suggestive of the presence.
Um So what scientists have turned to is a
proxy, they are unable to identify the pigment itself.
And so they have used the shape and size
of the tiny Granules that store melanin as a
proxy. If a uh if one of the storage
Granules is long and thin, as opposed to oval,
they assign colors to it. And uh it's a
bit controversial. Um We're still not sure if that
is entirely accurate. A lot of pictures have been
published of beautiful dinosaurs with green and orange and
red feathers but right now, um those are colors
that we think might have occurred. We, we don't
have any definitive proof yet
and we are also not sure about the degree
of certainty we have when it comes to the
color of their feathers and skin. Right? I mean,
in the particular case of dinosaurs, people, people generally
seem to be very fascinated by them and we
see all of those depictions of dinosaurs with those
bright colors. But we are not sure that they
really add those sorts of colors that we see,
right? That is absolutely correct. It is a very
dino centric world that we live in. Everyone wants
to know what the the dinosaurs look like and
perhaps at some point in the future, we will.
Mhm But when it comes to studying ancient pigments
and uh perhaps gathering more information about particular ex
uh species that already went extinct? Uh Is it
possible for us to perhaps learn a little bit
more about what would have been their behavior through
color patterns? For example.
Yeah. Thank you Ricardo for, for, for asking that
question because the whole reason we study ancient molecules
is to try to learn not just about their
evolution, that is the evolution of the organisms and
their phylogeny, but things like behavior and physiology. Uh
IT'S very difficult to study these phenomena from uh
simple rock structures. So for example, um um clinoids
that lived in the ocean, hundreds of millions of
years ago, like today's relatives of crinoids are often
brightly colored, bright red. And, um, we have been
able to show that, uh, these crinoids were in
fact pigmented hundreds of millions of years ago and
they probably served the same function that they serve
today. And that is that many crinoids contain a
poisonous molecule. And, um, which in some cases is
the pigment itself, but the pigment also serves as
a warning sign and tells potential predators to stay
away, you know, don't eat me, I'm poisonous. And
um it is that type of behavior that we
could never be able to learn about if we
were simply looking at the structure of the, of
the organism. And a wonderful example of um learning
about the physiology of an organism through study of
its pigments. Although in this case, uh the pigment
is not something that um uh is displayed on
in, in, in the uh the skin of the
organism. The, the porphyrins, the he molecule are also
color, they are pigments. Uh THE green color of,
of leaves is due to chlorophyll. Uh uh AND
and the uh porphyrin molecule inside of, of uh
of chlorophyll. And uh it's a pigment, it's green.
So blood is red, it's a pigment. And um
scientists were able to actually isolate purified. Actually, they
were able to synthesize pure, pure hemoglobin from mammoth,
40,000 year old mammoth. And they were able to
show that the hemoglobin in the mammoth 40,000 years
ago, functioned very differently from the way it functions
today. It um is more able to release its
oxygen at cold temperatures. And by so doing it,
it keeps the peripheral uh uh structures of the
mammoth warm, which it had to do back 40,000
years ago when uh everything was in the middle
of the ice ages. Whereas today's, for example, the
Asian or African elephant, um the hemoglobin doesn't like
cold temperatures and refuses to release its oxygen at
cold temperatures. So we, we have been able to,
to identify the biochemical basis for some physiology of
some albeit shallow time uh fossils, the the mammoth
and uh still on the topic of pigmentation in
what ways can it be related to a mechanism
like sexual selection?
Um I'm glad you asked that question because in
fact, uh II I, I'm in the process of
doing some, some interesting um research on some, this
is not in the book Ricardo, this is new
work um on something called female sexual display. And
I think we all know it's I I in
in, in the natural world, it's almost always the
males that have sexual displays. Um YOU know, the
the bright colors and and and the strutting around,
you know, that kind of thing. And so the
the existence of female sexual display is very interesting
to behaviorists, scientists who study behavior, right? And in
this particular case, we have um a type of
fly where the, the females have enlarged and very
darkly pigmented wings, which um, attracts the males, which
is very important because the females do not feed.
The only nutrition they get is when the male
brings them, uh, some prey to feed on. And
while the female feeds on that prey, the, the,
the male mates with the female fly. And so
here's a case where uh uh we have in,
in this work that I'm doing now, the first
example, um uh in the fossil record of female
sexual display. And it's based totally on the presence
of pigments in the wings of those female flies.
So here we can, we can trace perhaps the
evolution of that behavior as well as the presence
of that uh um display behavior in, in the
fossil record. Does that, does that come close to
answering your, your question?
Mhm Yes, it does. And I have just one
more question about pigments before we move on to
other biomolecules that you also explore in the book.
So, uh can we study the evolution of color
vision through pigmentation?
Uh That's an interesting question. And given that um
color vision is thought to have evolved hundreds of
millions of years ago. It is um it, it's
difficult. Um What we can do is simply make
the assumption that if there were colors hundreds of
millions of years ago, there must have been color
vision, right? One way that we can try to
estimate the age of color vision is by use,
excuse me, of, of something called the molecular clock,
which was in invented by a very famous chemist
polling uh you know, 60 years ago. And that
is we can study the sequence of different species
of organisms and we can use that protein sequence
to predict how those proteins changed back in time.
And we can go hundreds of millions of years
back in time. And we can make predictions of
when the molecules that are responsible for color visions,
they're called options. We can make predictions about when
they first occurred. Uh So on that level, the
answer to your question is, is, is yes, we
can make predictions about the evolution of color vision.
But in terms of using the actual fossil pigments,
uh we have not made it there yet.
And so now I would like to move on
to bio meals. And I have two big questions
about the that kind of mole biomolecule. So first
of all, what is the importance of biomet for
life itself? What kind of roles do they play?
I I think it's important that we all understand
that uh metals uh those that are present in
life forms, that is the biomeds are essential for
life without them. There would be no life and
um metals can occur in elemental form that is
a, a big nodule of pure iron or, or
pure copper, but usually they occur as metal salts.
So for example, um bone is uh has calcium,
which of course is a metal, but it's not
elemental metal. It is a metal salt, uh calcium
carbonate, calcium appetite. And in fact, most metals in
living organisms are salts of those metals. Um In
some cases, we're not sure exactly what the structure
of the metals were in some organisms. Uh For
example, uh in the book, we talk about the
discovery of ancient metals that strengthen and reinforce the
jaws of, of insects and even the insects that
live today, which still reinforce their jaws with metals.
We still don't know what the structure of those
metals is in those organisms. There's there's much yet
to be to be learned. Um And because metals
can be detected fairly easily and at very low
levels and in non destructive uh ways, um biomeds
is becoming a very important part of ancient biomolecule
research. And I think we're gonna see more and
more papers um about it.
And so, of course, uh again, I have to
repeat this kind of question for biomet because I
think it's one of the most interesting parts of
what you explore in the book when it comes
to the different biomolecules. But what kinds of information
can we get from them? So for example, when
we talked about pigmentation, we've mentioned phylogenetic information, behavioral
information as well. In this case of biomedicals, I
would imagine that physiological information is a very evident
uh sort of thing that we can get from
them. So, but generally speaking, what can we learn
by studying ancient biomeds?
I would have to um preface any answer with
the observation that we really need to know more
about biomeds in living organisms. OK. Um Before we
can go on to uh ask intelligent questions about
ancient organisms, the science is very new and uh
very little work has been done actually on, on
uh ancient biomeds. Other than for example, he and
um um other porphyrin metals um laboratories are investigating
uh the structure of biomeds in living organisms. And
they're discovering that mother nature is much more complicated
than we ever thought it was and produces structures
that we have uh as scientists have, have never
even dreamed about. So there's a lot to learn
about biomeds and I think we have to uh
do more work on, on living organisms before we
can uh uh answer your question, Ricardo.
OK. So, I mean, when it comes to the
several different possible things we could learn from biomedicals
like for example, phylogenetic information, anatomical information, physiological, information,
behavioral, and so on. It's still very limited at
this point, at least.
Yes. Uh I'm not sure to what degree we
can learn very much about phylogeny, but we can
definitely learn a lot about uh the physiology of,
of, of organisms based on the study of biomeds.
Mhm.
And so let's talk a little bit about proteins.
Here. So what kinds of proteins get preserved in
fossils? That's a great question. Um The um paper
that just came out by a uh a scientist
from the University of Turin in, in Italy. Uh
De Marchi was the senior author of this paper
uh extends uh the age of ancient biomolecules to
uh over 6 million years. And the sequence they
found had a very unique sequence of four negatively
charged subunits. And um that protein was isolated from
the shell of a bird. Almost all proteins are
isolated are isolated either from bones, from teeth, from
egg shells or from the shells of uh snails
and gastropods. And um all of those environment have
a calcium carbonate or calcium appetite, which is positively
charged or has positive charges. And so proteins that
are negative, that can bind to the positive charges
in the bone, the teeth, the shells are those
that are most likely to be preserved. And um
now that's for deep time, fossils for shallow time
and let's define shallow time as something like around
uh maybe several million years old. Um uh WE
can get uh more proteins and different types of
proteins simply because they are young and haven't degraded
yet. And so our studies, for example of um
uh the ancestors of human, which rely on um
fossil skeletons, uh we can get entire proteome. And
by the di the definition of a proteome, of
course, is the sequences of every protein in an
organism. And so what we can learn from those
is, is almost limitless. And um so the answer
to your question, Ricardo uh very much depends on
how old the specimen is. Um I think one
of the uh directions where ancient uh biomolecule research
will expand is in the area of um uh
marine mollusc shells, uh shells of gastropods and clams
go back hundreds of millions of years. Most of
them have been replaced. The, the shell material has
been replaced with other type of rock. But in
many cases, they're still the same chemicals that, that
made up the original shell of the living organism.
And those shells contain proteins and we just have
to be able to work with them more. And
I think what we will find uh are, are
we're gonna find thousands of new sequences from, from
that source.
And OK, so let me ask you perhaps a
few more questions about proteins because I think that
there are many interesting things here that we could
explore. But to what extent can we learn more
about if the physiology of particular organisms by studying
these preserved proteins? And, and I know that this
is a very broad question because proteins are everywhere.
I mean, they play all sorts of different roles
and there's, I don't know how many proteins out
there in uh in biological, in organisms. Uh I
mean, they're everywhere basically. But uh ca can we
learn uh more about their physiology by studying these
proteins. And perhaps, I don't know if you want
to illustrate that with uh perhaps a few examples
or not.
Sure the answer to your question. Caro is a
uh yes with an exclamation point. Um And given
that um most ancient proteins are isolated from uh
shallow time fossils, those that are tens of thousands
or hundreds of thousands of years old. And we
can get their entire protium, the sequence of every
protein in the organism. We can learn everything about
their physiology. Um We can um determine, for example,
that uh um some ancient humans or neanderthals, um
we um had an allergy to milk. Hm. That's,
that's one tiny example. Um Their immune system was
different. And in fact, uh uh all of us
contain a little bit of uh DNA and proteins
that we inherited from our Neanderthal ancestors, right? And
some of those proteins um affect our immune system
and some of us are in fact more susceptible
to catching the COVID virus. Mhm. Because of the
presence of Neanderthal proteins in our bodies. So, because
we can, we can, we can uh isolate the
entire protium of, of uh many organisms of the
answer to your question is that it's, it's, it's
a gold mine of, of, of work that we
can do relative to how the physiology of ancient
humans and ancient organisms differed from from modern day
humans and, and uh and other animals. Um YOU
know, our studies of human evolution, homo sapiens migration
from Africa, our studies of the genetics of the
neanderthals. We've learned so much about that and yet
we've just scratched the surface. Uh THE future is
going to be very, very exciting um relative to
our understanding of, of human evolution because of what
we can learn about um or from proteins, about
our behavior and, and physiology.
And can we learn more about phylogenetics from ancient
proteins? And I mean, uh uh I, while I'm
asking you this, I'm probably asking you two different
types of questions. I mean, if we can learn
about phylogenetics directly from ancient proteins or also indirectly
uh uh learning more about genetics from proteins.
The older the specimen is, the older the protein
is, the more we can learn, it's all dependent
on how far back we can isolate uh proteins
and, and DNA from um the construction of phylogeny
and phylogenetics is, is um something that is um
dependent. Mhm um um um HAVING a lot of
specimens from a lot of different periods of time,
right? And the further back in time, the more
phylogenetics we can do. Um AND and right now,
we're kind of limited by uh the fact that
uh um ancient DNA and ancient ancient proteins don't
go very far back in time. And this and
this might be uh an appropriate time to bring
up the work of Dr Mary Schweitzer who has
uh uh published about the sequences from uh dinosaurs
that are hundreds of millions of years old or,
or hundreds of million years old. This work is,
is very controversial. Um uh HER work um is
uh can't be reproduced by some of the laboratories.
Yeah. And so I think the consensus is that
the oldest DNA is only about 2 million years
old. The oldest proteins are about 4 million years
old. Now, 6 million years old with the work
from Italy, I think we all hope the doctors
Switzer is correct. And that in fact, we can
isolate proteins from dinosaurs because it would be wonderful
to be able to do uh phylogenetics, reconstruct the
phylogeny of dinosaurs and compare that work to the
phylogeny we have made that are based simply on,
on structure. Mhm
uh And so just before we get directly into
ancient DNA, since you mentioned dinosaurs there briefly again.
So uh one interesting thing that I read about
in your book is uh when we find dinosaur
bones, sometimes it's not just the bones themselves that
we can study, but also ancient blood vessels within
them, right? So could, could you tell us a
little bit about that?
Yes, that, that is the work uh of, of
Doctor Schweitzer. And she's very famous for uh showing
all of us that you can take a dinosaur
bone. And when you dissolve all the minerals you
are left over with this uh soft tissue, it
almost looks like uh a tiny little piece of,
of, of, of meat. And uh within that material,
you can isolate structures that very much look like
blood vessels. OK. And um this work uh has
been repeated by many, many different laboratories. Um I
have been able to repeat this work myself in
the lab. And um the, the, the problem is
what is that material made of? And if in
fact, it is made of, of protein and DNA
can we isolate it intact. And that is the
big controversy. Some people say no, some people say
yes.
So talking then about ancient DNA, how well does
it get preserved? And in what kinds of structures
again, uh almost all ancient DNA comes from bones
or teeth. Mhm. Um There is something called environmental
DNA. OK, where people would just take a shovel
full of dirt from the bottom of a cave
and they can isolate DNA, which is very surprising
given given how, how fragile a molecule it is.
But most ancient DNA is isolated from, from bones
and teeth. And um in some cases, if the
uh specimen is young enough, we can get the
entire genome. Uh THE genome being all of the
uh DNA from a particular organism. And uh again,
I if we have that kind of information, um
we can determine a great deal of, of, of
uh things about the behavior physiology, phylogeny of that
organism. It all depends on, on its age. Um
THE um oldest DNA, I think is about 2
million years old and it's only fragmentary and it's
uh it's uh fairly difficult to do uh any
uh in depth uh work on phylogenetics with something
that is that fragmentary. Um I'm not sure I
answered your question, Ricardo. Uh Please restate the question
if, if, if I didn't
uh yes. One part of the question that perhaps
uh you didn't answer directly, I think is how
well it gets uh preserved. I mean, is it
easy for it to get preserved in ancient DNA
or not?
Yeah. So, uh uh again, it's dependent on the
age of the specimen and the younger the age,
um it can be preserved entirely intact, beautifully preserved
and, and the older we go, the less uh
uh there is and the more fragmentary it is.
So, everything depends on age. I think ancient DNA,
depending on how we define ancient, has drastically changed.
Uh THE sciences of anthropology and archaeology because those,
those two sciences work in the realm of, of
um shallow time specimens that are 1000 years old
or 5000, 10,000, 100,000 years old. And DNA uh
is beautifully preserved uh under many conditions um in
specimens that are just uh you know, tens of
thousands of years old. And, and, and uh i
it's a near infinite amount of information that we
can obtain from uh from those specimens. But, but
again, that's not in the field of, of paleobiology.
That's more anthropology and, and uh and archaeology. A
good example is our understanding of the evolution of
the um uh the Black death or the um
um bubonic plague which first appeared in the early
13 hundreds. And we were able to isolate DNA
from uh people who, who the skeletons of people
who died from the Black death. And we were
able to uh study the uh evolution of that
virus and even determine when in fact, uh it
underwent a mutation to become uh terribly pathogenic. So,
yeah, it's a the the the future of of
shallow time DNA is uh um you know, it's
gonna be very exciting to see what, what happens
here in the future.
So if I understand it correctly, the amount of
information that we can potentially get from ancient DNA
is so much and so varied, that's probably one
of the reasons why many people usually refer to
ancient DNA as the holy grail of ancient biomolecules,
right. Yeah.
Yeah. Um DNA, of course, um encodes proteins and
so much of the genetic information from DNA is
present in proteins, but there is a lot of
genetic information that is in DNA only. Um And
it is uh I think uh easier to do
phylogenetic reconstruction using DNA than it is uh protein.
So, there are distinct advantages to using DNA. Um
We just have to figure out how to uh
uh extract it more effectively and, and more efficiently
from older specimens.
And at this point in time, do we have
any idea at all about when DNA might have
first originated on earth? At least?
No, that, uh it's a sh a short question
or a short answer to a very complicated question.
Um People think it may, uh, well, in fact,
we have fossils of single celled organisms that are
over a billion years old. Billion with A B.
And so we know there was life on earth
that is a, a billion, perhaps 2 billion years
old. And we have to assume that because life
was able to reproduce even back then, that there
is a uh DNA based mechanism for reproduction. Uh
So we have to assume that DNA evolved at
least 2 billion years ago, probably longer. Um But
we don't know how and we don't know exactly
when there are some, a scientist who believed that
it was not DNA, that was the basis of
original life forms, but in fact RN A, right.
Uh But again, there, there's no way to uh
no way to prove that RN A is, in
fact, even more fragile than, than DNA. And it's
very unlikely that we will ever be able to
recover ancient RN A.
Uh So at least at this point in time,
it's not possible to get RN A from fossils,
right? Oh, ok.
Uh And uh I mean, before we get into
other topics, let me just ask you one more
question. Um How much can we learn about the
ancestry of our own species through ancient DNA? Because,
you know, there's always this sort of very interesting
questions or questions that people are usually very interested
about particularly paleoanthropology and people like that about, for
example, our last common ancestor with chimpanzees and Bonobos
and the, our exact monin lineage and all of
that. So can we can ancient DNA help us
answer those kinds of questions?
Yeah, I'm looking for uh a book up on
my bookshelf here. Uh uh Robert Reich uh wrote
a book about that. And in fact, many books
have been written uh about the uh phylogeny, the
evolution of not just Homo sapiens but our ancestors
and not just our most recent ancestors, the Neanderthal,
but the homo erectus and uh you know, way
back uh uh to uh over a million years
old. Um The amount of information that we can
obtain from our studies of um ancient DNA, from
the genus Homo. It is mind boggling. There is
so much we can learn. And again, it's not
just phylogenetics, it's behavioral, it's physiological. Um As I
mentioned, there are many books written about this already.
Uh AND there will be many more, we've barely
scratched the surface. Uh There are so many different
questions. Um It is an area that um I
did not cover to any great extent in the
book because I am not an expert on, on,
on DNA. And so uh I'm proud of the
fact that I know what I don't know. And
uh so II I leave it to, to other
experts uh to tell you about um the uh
the work with ancient DNA. But uh it will
revolutionize science and it will revolutionize our understanding of,
of the evolution of, of our own species.
So, uh I mean, throughout the entire interview, we've
been focusing a lot on animals. But what about
plants, what have we learned about, for example, early
plant life and the evolution of plants through an
ancient biomolecules.
Unfortunately, the answer is almost nothing and the reason
uh that we have learned so little from plants
and II I, I'm not trying to be um
uh facetious or, or comical here is that plants
don't have bones and that's where we get all
of our ancient DNA and all of our ancient
protein plants are made of soft tissue, which is
very easily degraded. Uh There is almost nothing in
the scientic scientific literature on plant DNA because it
just degrades so very, very quickly. There is a
little bit about um uh plant protein, but it's
uh only a few 1000 years old. The most
we know about ancient biomolecules from plants is based
on uh what we call small molecules. Uh And
even that doesn't go very far back in time,
let me define small molecules by giving some examples.
Um We have all made extracts of plants usually
using hot water uh that contain small molecules like
uh caffeine, for example, from the coffee bean and
from tea leaves, there are literally tens of thousands
of small molecules that are unique to plants. Uh
THINK of all the uh hallucis hallucinogenic uh drugs,
for example, um Aspirin, acetylsalicylic acid is uh a
small molecule that you can isolate from plants. All
of these are unique to plants. They're not present
in animals and they can be preserved in, in
plants that go back uh many millions of years.
And in fact, uh at one point in time,
some scientists proposed that we study phylogenetics based on
the presence of those small molecules. So I guess
the term phylogenetics wouldn't be the the appropriate term.
Um BUT it would be AAA way to study
the evolution of plants based on their small molecules.
And um so you would take a fossil leaf
and you would scrape it off of a rock
and you would extract it just like you would
extract a tea leaf and from that extract, you
would be able to isolate tiny molecules, some of
which may be unique to that particular plant. And
so you could differentiate one plant from another. Uh
You could actually do taxonomy based on the presence
of uh small molecules that are unique to individual
plants. That chemo taxonomy, let's call it that, let's
give it that name chemo taxonomy. Uh NEVER caught
on it, it is not really used at all
in, in modern plant taxonomy, but um it does
uh exist simply because of the presence of um
these small molecules and plants for, for literally tens
of millions of years.
So I have two final general questions, let's say
to ask you. So, potentially how much of the
phylogeny and ancient physio of the total biomass of
the earth? Can we or could we get a
good understanding of through ancient genomes, proteins? And of
course, other biomolecules,
we don't know. Um I think it's um uh
most of us should appreciate that 90% of all
the species of organisms that have ever lived on
earth are now extinct. And so that means that
90% of everything we have to we have uh
to learn from is in the fossil record, right?
And so potentially there's a huge amount we can
learn. We're limited only by the uh preservation or
the lack of preservation of the uh chemicals, whether
they're DNA or protein pigments or small molecules. I
think paleobiology will change over the next uh few
years. And uh uh they will take ancient biomolecules
research to heart and more young people, I think
uh are becoming very interested in ancient biomolecule research
and I think it will, it, it is a
new and, and rapidly growing field. Um, THERE'S a
huge amount of potential. Um, BUT II, I certainly
can't put a uh a number on it right
now, Ricardo, I wish I could. But, uh, uh,
again, we're, uh, um, despite the fact that we
might, um, publish a lot and think we know
a lot. Uh, WE'RE, we're, we're pretty ignorant about
the evolution of life on earth.
That's fair enough. And, uh, that also makes for
a good segue to my last question. And you've
already talked a little bit about this. But how
do you look at the future of the study
of ancient biomolecules and the information we can potentially
get from them? I mean, are there any predictions
you would make? Are there for example, any exciting
new developments that you're seeing?
I think the the the most exciting development uh
in the field of ancient biomolecular research has nothing
to do with fossils. And that's because it is
a science called ancient sequence reconstruction where we use
um computers to predict the sequence of ancient proteins
or ancient DNA. Mhm. And this interestingly and perhaps
surprisingly is most commonly used in uh drug discovery
in uh by, by pharmaceutical companies because they want
to understand the evolution of disease. They want to
understand the evolution of proteins that uh cause various
diseases. And we can try to predict using this
computer based uh science of ancient sequence construction, we
can try to uh determine how proteins that cause
disease differed back in time and what happened to
them to make them uh cause disease. And this
will give us a basis for developing drugs that
will help us to, to treat those diseases. So,
in a way here, we're talking about drug discovery
and we're supposed to be talking about ancient proteins.
But I think believe it or not, the two
are related
that that's amazing. Uh And so let's perhaps end
on that note then. And the book is again,
Remnants of Ancient life, the New Science of old
fossils. I'm leaving a link to it in the
description of the interview. And Doctor Greenwald just before
we go apart from your book, would you like
to tell people where they can find your work
on the internet?
Yes. The, the, the book is published by uh
Princeton University Press and they can be purchased at
their website. And um one thing I would like
to say is that uh all of uh my
profits such as they are uh go directly to
the uh the Library of the Natural History Museum
in uh at the Smithsonian. And so, uh if
anyone in fact does purchase a book, uh uh
they will be able to in doing so contribute
to the libraries. Um So, yeah, II, I wish
um um that um I could uh uh sign
everyone's book uh based uh through the zoom session.
But uh I guess that's not technically possible yet.
But uh yeah, I, I uh I hope that
uh uh people would find that it is an
enjoyable read.
No, let me just say myself that I found
it uh really fascinating read. I really love the
book and I hope that everyone in my audience
runs and buys it. It's very interesting. So, thank
you so much for writing the book. And also
of course for coming on the show, it's been
a real pleasure to talk to you.
Thank you, Ricardo. I, I appreciate the opportunity to
speak with you.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B no Wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z. Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger, Ken Herz
and La Jung Y and the Samuel K Hes
Mark Smith J Tom Hummel s friends, David Wilson,
Yasa, dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte
Bli Nico Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi, Nale me,
Gary G Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and YPJ Barboza
Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franka
Gilon. Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary. Ftw Daniel Friedman,
William Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris
Williams and Peter Wo David Will Di A Cost.
Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie
Chevalier, Bangalore Fist, Larry Dey Junior, Old Einon Starry
Michael Bailey. Then spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff
mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Kemple Thomas Dvor
Luke Neeson, Chris to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica.
No, Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George
Katis, Valentine Steinman, Perlis, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert
Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Janner Urla.
Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to
my producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca Stuffin,
Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller
Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro,
Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie.
Thank you for all